From The New York Times, I'm Michael
Barbaro. This is The Daily.
Despite his threats of escalation,
President Trump seems increasingly
determined to end the conflict in Iran
through negotiations.
His problem?
Iran isn't on the same page.
Today, David Sanger on the standoff over
when to turn from war to diplomacy.
It's Monday, March 30th.
>> Mr. Sanger, thank you for making time
for us on a Sunday, of all days.
>> Great to be with you, Michael. What a
month.
>> Yes, indeed. And it's been exactly
pretty much a month since this war
began.
And David, I want to start with what
should be a simple yes or no question
under ordinary circumstances, but
there's open debate about it and genuine
confusion. Is the United States
currently negotiating with Iran to bring
this war to an end?
>> Well, as you suggest, Michael, it's a
more complicated question than it sounds
like, and I would say the simple answer
is that the United States is engaging in
operations right now to shape a
negotiation with Iran.
But I wouldn't say the negotiations have
yet started.
>> Well, let me highlight
some of the source of the confusion.
Last week, we had this very explicit
claim from President Trump. I'm going to
quote him. "I am pleased to report that
the United States of America and the
country of Iran have had very good and
productive conversations
regarding a complete and total
resolution of our hostilities in the
Middle East. Okay, that's that's it.
Explicit claim of negotiation. A few
hours later, Iran's government issues a
statement that says the precise
opposite. Quote, we deny what US
President Donald Trump said regarding
any negotiations between the United
States and the Islamic Republic of Iran.
>> So, they were both fibbing to some
considerable degree.
>> Huh. Both.
>> Aren't you shocked? Who are you going to
believe here? The president of the
United States or the Iranian government?
And in this case, I would not really
believe either.
The president wants to make it sound as
if he has forced the Iranians
through the show of brute strength that
has resulted in 11,000 targets being hit
to finally come to the negotiating
table.
>> Mhm.
>> The Iranians want to show, for reasons
of national pride
and good strategy at this moment, that
they are not coming to the negotiating
table on America's terms.
>> Mhm.
>> And so, we're at a bit of a standoff in
which the Iranians are fundamentally
saying "Hey, we're winning by virtue of
the fact that we're still alive."
>> Mhm.
>> And the president is in the unusual
position here of having to move from
calling for an unconditional surrender
to calling for some kind of talks.
>> Right.
>> And talks almost always mean compromise.
>> Well, let's focus for a little bit on
why the president seems so invested in a
diplomatic off-ramp to this war.
Because despite striking 11,000 targets
in Iran the US has discovered not just
the limits of its military force in
Iran, but the blowback and how
problematic it's become. And just to
summarize what we have established in
previous episodes, the Iranian regime is
badly diminished, but it's not
collapsing. Regime change is not in the
offing at the moment. The war has locked
up the Strait of Hormuz and paralyzed
the global energy industry. Economic
repercussions of this war have grown
week by week, and US allies are not
answering Trump's call to get involved.
>> So, Trump is looking for a diplomatic
way to end all of those problems.
>> Yeah, he has put himself in a real box
here.
Where he is discovering, as you suggest,
that the kind of military power that
he's exercised has not brought about the
kind of political result that he
envisioned.
And it certainly hasn't brought it about
in the time period he had in mind.
>> Mhm.
>> That he can do all of this bombing,
but it doesn't necessarily lead to
regime change. That he can try to speed
along a capitulation,
but if the Iranians play it right, the
economic impact just keeps snowballing.
>> Well, David, with that in mind, help us
understand what the US efforts to bring
Iran to the negotiating table, as messy
as they've been so far, what they
actually look like. Kind of technically
speaking, what the US outreach has been.
>> Well, Michael, the outreach so far has
pretty much been limited to a two-page
document that had 15 items on it.
>> Mhm.
>> 12 of them were demands on Iran, and
three of them were offers to Iran.
But the essence of them is this,
Michael, that Iran gives up any hope of
ever being able to enrich nuclear fuel,
do any of the steps that could lead to a
nuclear weapon. That it limit its
arsenal of missiles to a very limited
number that can't reach Israel.
And in return, the US has provided some
incentives, starting with the lifting of
sanctions that would give Iran a pathway
to reentering the global international
economy.
>> Got it. And what has Iran's response
been to that 15-point proposal?
>> You know, the response was kind of a
non-response, Michael. It was five of
their own points that basically started
with, "Let's talk about compensation for
all of the damage you've done to Iran's
infrastructure and people over the past
month. And oh, by the way, we want you
to recognize our sovereignty over the
entire Strait of Hormuz, which we think
is a pathway to expanding what the
Iranians have been doing in recent days,
which is charging a very large toll for
any ships that want to make it through."
>> Right. That doesn't sound like two sides
being anywhere near close to even
agreeing on what they're negotiating.
>> That's right. And it might explain why
you've heard the president move from
making the case that the Iranians want
to talk to making the case that if the
Iranians don't talk, he's going to hit
them even harder.
But behind the scenes, the US is
thinking ahead toward what a negotiation
would look like. And in fact, they had
hoped that one might begin as early as
this weekend, but it didn't happen.
>> Well, to the degree that the US has a
plan for negotiation and assumes that at
some point in this conflict, there will
be a negotiation, who do they see as
being the face of these negotiations for
the US? And what would that negotiator
be empowered to get and give up?
>> Well, they haven't said precisely who
would participate in the negotiations,
but what they have dangled is that J.D.
Vance, the Vice President, would lead
the effort.
>> Hmm.
>> And administration officials have said
to me that this is an effort to signal
to the Iranians that this is a serious
conversation. That we're sending the
country's number two official
empowered to make decisions and to get
President Trump on the phone on one ring
>> Wow.
>> to actually negotiate. And what's
fascinating about this is we haven't
seen Vice President Vance involved in
any of the negotiations
to this point.
And of course, it's Vance who is widely
reported to have been the least
enthusiastic
about getting into a conflict with Iran
to begin with.
>> Right. Does the fact that he has been
skeptical of this war potentially give
him greater credibility
in bringing it to an end, or is this
simply just the fact that he's the
number two in our system that's supposed
to lend some prestige and credibility to
the idea of him as a negotiator?
>> I think it's all of the above, Michael.
The Iranians view him as probably the
one they'd most like to talk to because
they think he opposed this idea from the
start.
I think for President Trump, it's an
opportunity to show to the Iranians that
he's serious about these talks. And I
think the third message that it sends is
actually to the MAGA base.
>> Huh.
>> It's don't worry, this is under control.
J.D. Vance, who was the most outspoken
in favor of staying out of foreign wars,
is the one we've put in charge of ending
this one.
>> It seems difficult to close out the
conversation about the U.S. plans for
negotiation without mentioning Israel,
this partner in this entire operation.
And my sense is that Israel's enthusiasm
for ending this war may not be the same
as President Trump's because Israel has
simply more going on in this conflict.
It's got ground troops in Lebanon
even as it's also continuing to assault
Iran. It has more of an agenda in this
conflict in a way.
>> With every passing week of this war,
the differing objectives of the US and
Israel have become more and more evident
to us.
President Trump is obviously quite
concerned about the effects on the stock
market, the effects of oil and gas not
making it through the Strait of Hormuz,
the backlash that he's getting from the
Europeans, from Asian allies.
Israel really isn't concerned about
almost any of those.
>> Right.
>> To them, the one question here is at the
end of this process,
is Iran so defanged that it couldn't
even think of striking beyond its
borders again?
The US has an interest in an Iranian
government emerging from this that is at
least cohesive enough to make decisions
and engage in international
negotiations.
The Israelis
>> might be perfectly happy with sheer
chaos.
>> Mhm.
>> It would then lead to enough social
upheaval in Iran that it would overthrow
the current regime. And better yet, as
far as the Israelis are concerned, might
result in such internal upheaval
that Iran can't even think about Israel.
>> Mhm.
>> But what's really interesting to me,
Michael, is that while this dance takes
place about whether and where and when
negotiations would take place.
The Israelis are using every available
minute to hit more targets across Iran.
On Friday, they went after a number of
nuclear sites. And the Iranians, for
their part, are using every moment to go
after American targets in the Gulf. And
they had one big success from their
point of view, which is they took out
two major American aircraft. One a
in-air refueling aircraft, and the other
one of these command centers that cost
half a billion dollars or more
>> Wow.
>> that are used to go defend the Gulf
against incoming drones and missiles.
And they did that on the same day that
they were exchanging messages about
where negotiations may take place.
>> Which sounds like the opposite of Iran
getting ready for negotiations.
>> Well, it could be.
Or it could be a negotiating gambit in
itself.
>> We'll be right back.
So, David, I think we pretty clearly
established here Iran's position at this
moment is basically saying to the US,
"Good luck with
your negotiated end of this war. You
started it. We're not going to help you
quickly end it." And you had suggested
at the beginning of this conversation
that that could be a function of pride
or strategy. Let's try to get to the
bottom of that question. If President
Trump is offering Iran an end to a daily
barrage of attacks that took out its
supreme leader, have decimated its
military, have crippled a lot of its
infrastructure. Why isn't Iran somewhat
eager to take up that offer?
>> You know, Michael, this is the question
the president seems to ask his aides
very regularly, which is why haven't
they capitulated yet?
And I think the answer's complicated.
But the first part of it is that the
surviving Iranian leadership asked the
question, why should we trust them in
the negotiations?
Back in June of last year, they were
engaged in negotiations and it got cut
short by the attack on Fordow, Natanz,
and Isfahan, the three major nuclear
sites.
>> sites, yep.
>> That's right. In February, they were
negotiating on a broader agreement and
suddenly the Israelis and the Americans
team up on what was clearly a
well-planned, well-coordinated attack on
the entire country.
>> Right, negotiations are kind of a cover
for the US to attack Iran.
>> And to buy the time to assemble the
forces. And so the Iranians are saying,
we're not going to listen to what you
say, we're going to look at what you do.
And currently what they're seeing is
that the US is sending thousands of more
troops to the region, starting with two
Marine Expeditionary Units. And so from
the Iranian point of view, they're
looking at this and thinking, well, the
president is building up to another
attack while he's urging us to
negotiate.
>> Right, here we go again.
>> Yeah, right. And of course, Michael, we
don't know if the president is actually
planning to go use these troops or
whether he's just using them for
leverage
for whenever those negotiations start
up.
>> Dave, can I ask you because you've
covered a lot of diplomacy in your day,
is it understood that if you attack
people, not once but twice during formal
negotiations, you're really
disincentivizing them from ever seeing
diplomacy as anything other than a
Trojan horse.
>> Well, in most administrations I've
covered, and this is the fifth president
I've covered, that would have been the
case.
But in the Trump administration, I think
there's sort of a more general view that
force isn't necessarily the last resort.
It could be an early tool that you use
before you come back for negotiations a
second time and say, "Want that again?
Want worse?"
And so, I think that this administration
views the use of force as truly an
element of the negotiations.
I'm not sure that their adversaries
always see it the same way.
>> Okay, so that's a major reason why Iran
would be reluctant to engage in
negotiations, but beyond that, what does
Iran gain from the war lasting any
longer, given that the pain of it is so
disproportionately felt by that
government?
>> Well, there could be an element of pride
to this, as we suggested.
And this is a deeply unpopular
government. Probably at any given point
in time, as we've discussed on past
episodes,
something like 80% of Iranians would
give you a long list of complaints about
economic mismanagement, corruption, and
the sheer brutality of the Iranian
government.
>> Right.
>> So, the idea that foreign actors are
coming in to attack the core of the
society, terrorize ordinary Iranians who
are just trying to get by,
the surviving Iranian leadership may see
that as a way to go unify a populace
that otherwise hates them.
>> Interesting. So, not necessarily just
pride, but kind of a strategic
understanding that the longer the war
goes on, the more likely it is that
Iranians alienated from this regime
might start to look to it
as a source of strength or see it as the
victim of US excess. And in that sense,
time is just on their side.
>> Well, that's right. And there's another
thing that time buys the Iranians, the
ability to hurt Donald Trump
where it counts the most.
Watching markets slide, watching oil
prices go up, watching international
anxiety increase, watching the Western
alliance fracture.
>> Mhm.
>> And all of that takes time. So, take a
look at what happened just at the end of
last week. The president late on
Thursday said that he was going to allow
another 10 days for negotiations to take
place.
And you might expect the markets to jump
the next day.
>> Mhm.
>> Saying, "Oh, there's an ending to this
coming."
>> Right.
>> Instead, the markets kept their meltdown
underway. The president is
now presiding over what people are going
to begin to call the Trump slump or the
Iran slump.
And the Iranians understand that if the
markets continue to melt down, if the
price of oil continues to go up, that
only gives them more leverage whenever
negotiations begin.
>> David, just play that out. So, let's
presume that the 15-point proposal from
Trump is actually something that
represents the US position in any
negotiations.
And Iran has the war play out for a few
more weeks, maybe even longer.
Oil prices stay really high. Markets are
gyrating.
I mean, does Iran think that suddenly
they're going to get one of those
proposals removed? That sanctions are
going to be taken away faster. I mean,
like just logistically, what are they
going to gain that would compensate for
the losses that they're going to be
taking every single day to their
infrastructure, to their military, to
their people?
>> I can't crawl inside their heads, but I
can just take a guess from having
covered negotiations with Iran before.
One of the big hang-ups
has been this question of whether Iran
will permanently give up its right to
enrich nuclear fuel.
And the US has insisted, "No, this time
the Iranians have to agree they'll never
again make nuclear fuel." And the
Iranians have had a consistent position
that they're a signatory of the nuclear
non-proliferation treaty, that all
signatories have a right to enrich
uranium as long as they are not
diverting it to bomb projects. They
maintain that they've long committed to
never building a nuclear weapon. None of
us believe that, but that has been their
formal commitment. I think they believe
that the administration may well relent
on this point, and that they will get a
pause of a few years in which they agree
not to produce any nuclear fuel, and
then some limited amount of enrichment
after that, that they would stay in the
game.
Now, if the Trump administration agreed
to that, it would be a big backing away
from their position.
It would also end up looking a lot more
like the agreement that President Obama
got out of Iran in 2015, in which the
Iranians shipped almost all their
nuclear fuel out of the country, but
kept low-level enrichment.
>> I suppose since you mentioned nuclear
enrichment and nuclear weapons, we
should probably acknowledge the point
that this entire war so far has no doubt
increased the incentive for Iran to seek
out a nuclear weapon. It's not exactly a
strategic secret that when you have a
nuclear weapon, you're a lot less likely
to be attacked by the US and Israel than
when you don't.
>> Absolutely. The Iranians cannot have
missed the point
that the Trump administration has not
attacked North Korea.
North Korea has missiles that can reach
the United States, not sometime in the
future, but now. North Korea has 60 or
more nuclear weapons, not at some point
in the future, but now.
And that's the very reason that the US
wouldn't even consider an attack like
this on Pyongyang.
And so, you know, depending on how this
all plays out, we may have just given
Iran every incentive to follow the North
Korean model.
>> David, I want to end just by asking you
to reflect on something that you know
very intimately,
which is that the US and Iran did engage
in very serious and successful
negotiations back in 2015.
And you got a really up-close view of
those talks. I remember reading your
coverage of that. You were there during
the negotiations as they reached their
apex, and this deal was signed, a
historic deal between these mortal foes.
So, we know these two countries are
capable of serious, high-level,
history-making
diplomacy if they want to.
>> They are capable of it, Michael, and I
did cover that negotiation for the year
and a half or 2 years that it went on.
And it was long and painful,
and in the end, it resulted in an
agreement that the Iranians largely kept
to until President Trump pulled out of
the accord in 2018. And historians will
be debating for a long time whether you
can draw a straight line from that
decision in 2018 to this attack.
>> Right, cuz that that diplomacy was
intended to ensure we never had a war
like this, and he tore it up and now we
do.
>> It was intended to make sure that the
Iranian program stayed in a box, and
that you would have at least a year's
notice if the Iranians were racing for a
bomb. Then President Trump pulled out,
and the Iranians stayed in accord with
the agreement for a year or two, then
decided they were Trump's to do that,
and they did race right to the edge of a
bomb.
>> Right.
>> But you know, Michael, I've been
thinking about this, and
there's no chance that we can go back to
the kind of negotiation that took place
in 2015.
>> Why?
>> That was quite limited. It was just
focused on the Iranian nuclear program,
and even the effort by the US to expand
it out to missiles failed.
But today, the war has unleashed so many
more issues beyond the nuclear program
itself.
>> Mhm.
>> I mean, first, the Iranians have
demonstrated a huge ability to disrupt
the global economy, to shut off the
Strait of Hormuz. That's now going to
become a focus of negotiation in a way
it wasn't even a month ago.
>> Right.
>> In 2015, there was very little trust
between the Iranians and the Americans.
Unpopular as the Obama deal was
in Washington, it was even more
unpopular in Tehran. We forget that
because no one believed the US would
carry through and lift sanctions. Today,
there's even less trust.
>> Mhm.
>> Back then,
the Iranians committed, as part of the
2015 agreement, that they would never
seek a nuclear weapon.
I'm not sure that the new government of
Iran could get away with that today.
>> Mhm.
>> And finally, I think we have to
recognize that
after war has started, after you have
shattered a government,
after you have bombed its people,
that you've then unleashed a whole
series of new political forces that none
of us really understand.
Maybe this will end the way President
Trump envisioned and Bibi Netanyahu
envisioned on February 28th with an
uprising against the Iranian government.
But it's very possible that we have
triggered the opposite effect and we're
just not going to know that for months,
maybe years to come.
>> So as infinitely complicated and
delicate as the 2015 negotiations that
you covered were, what lies ahead
between Iran and the US will be even
more so.
>> Wildly more complicated, Michael.
Before we were just negotiating over the
status of their nuclear program. Now
we're negotiating over their future
survivability as a state.
And that is completely existential for
the Iranians and it's going to add
dramatically
to the complexity of bringing this war
to an end.
>> Oh, damn it.
Thank you very much. Appreciate it. As
always.
>> Thanks, Michael.
>> On Sunday night, the Times reported that
several hundred US special operations
forces, including Army Rangers and Navy
SEALs, have arrived in the Middle East
as President Trump weighs his options.
In the latest sign of how far off
diplomacy may be,
the speaker of Iran's parliament, a
potential partner in any negotiations
with the US
warned that if the United States deploys
any ground troops into Iran that Iran
would quote set them on fire.
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need in the day.
>> I protest all of Trump's illegal,
immoral,
reckless, and feckless, endless wars.
>> We're out here because we feel that the
Constitution is under threat.
>> In small towns and big cities across the
US,
protesters gathered on Saturday for
thousands of rallies against President
Trump, his domestic policies, and his
use of the military at home and
overseas.
>> And I'm afraid
that I want to be king
who is busy building himself and his
billionaires
a ballroom.
And turns to use ICE as his own private
army to do his bidding to make him king,
but he is not a king.
>> Organizers said that the No Kings
rallies drew millions of people.
Among the speakers were lawmakers,
activists, and performers, including
Bruce Springsteen, who addressed crowds
outside Minnesota's state capitol in St.
Paul.
>> This is still America.
And this reactionary nightmare, and
these invasions of American cities will
not stand.
>> And
President Trump's emergency order to pay
airport security screeners signed on
Friday
is expected to end the crisis of wait
times at the country's airports.
But it's unclear exactly how long it
will take for the security lines to
return to normal.
Meanwhile, a permanent solution remains
elusive because the Department of
Homeland Security remains largely shut
down.
Today's episode was produced by Mary
Wilson and Stella Tan.
It was edited by Chris Hackle with help
from Rachel Quester and Maria Byrne.
Contains music by Diane Wong and Marion
Lozano.
Our theme music is by Wonderly.
This episode was engineered by Alyssa
Moxley.
That's it for The Daily. I'm Michael
Barbaro.
See you tomorrow.